doc/index.rst, before:

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
perf: Toolkit to run Python benchmarks
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

* `perf project homepage at GitHub
  <https://github.com/haypo/perf>`_ (code, bugs)
* `perf documentation
  <https://perf.readthedocs.io/>`_ (this documentation)
* `Download latest perf release at the Python Cheeseshop (PyPI)
  <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/perf>`_
* License: MIT


Install perf
============

Command to install perf on Python 3::

    python3 -m pip install perf

Command to install perf on Python 2::

    python2 -m pip install perf

Python 2.7 or Python 3 are supported.


Command line interface
======================

perf.timeit CLI
---------------

Microbenchmark::

    python3 -m perf.timeit
        [-h] [-v]
        [--json] [--raw]
        [--metadata]
        [-p PROCESSES] [-n SAMPLES] [-l LOOPS] [-w WARMUPS]
        [-s SETUP]
        stmt [stmt ...]

Iterations:

* ``PROCESSES``: number of processes used to run the benchmark (default: 25)
* ``SAMPLES``: number of samples per process (default: 3)
* ``WARMUPS``: the number of samples used to warmup to benchmark (default: 1)
* ``LOOPS``: number of loops per sample. By default, the timer is calibrated
  to get samples taking between 100 ms and 1 sec.

Options:

* ``-v`` enables verbose mode
* ``-vv`` enables very verbose mode
* ``--metadata`` displays metadata
* ``--raw`` runs a single process
* ``--json`` writes result as JSON into stdout, and write other messages
  into stderr

Example::

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit 1+1
    .........................
    Average: 18.3 ns +- 0.3 ns (25 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops)

.. warning::
   timeit ``-n`` option becomes ``-l`` in perf.timeit.
   timeit ``-r`` option becomes ``-n`` in perf.timeit.


perf CLI
--------

Display run results or results::

    python3 -m perf
        [-v]
        filename.json [filename2.json ...]

Each file must be a text file which contains one result encoded to JSON per
line. If a filename is "-", read JSON from stdin.

Example::

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit --json 1+1 > run.json
    .........................
    Average: 18.6 ns +- 0.4 ns (25 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops)

    $ python3 -m perf run.json
    Metadata:
    - aslr: enabled
    - cpu_count: 4
    - cpu_model_name: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-2600 CPU @ 3.40GHz
    - date: 2016-06-07T15:07:27
    - platform: Linux-4.4.9-300.fc23.x86_64-x86_64-with-fedora-23-Twenty_Three
    - python_executable: /usr/bin/python3
    - python_implementation: cpython
    - python_version: 3.4.3

    Average: 18.6 ns +- 0.4 ns (25 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops)

Store the result and then display it allows to control how results are
displayed.  For example, timeit doesn't show metadata by default, whereas perf
CLI shows them by default. Use verbose mode to see more details::

    $ python3 -m perf -M -v run.json
    Run 1/25: warmup (1): 19.4 ns; runs (3): 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns
    Run 2/25: warmup (1): 18.2 ns; runs (3): 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns
    Run 3/25: warmup (1): 18.2 ns; runs (3): 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns
    (...)
    Run 25/25: warmup (1): 18.2 ns; runs (3): 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns
    Average: 18.6 ns +- 0.4 ns (min: 18.2 ns, max: 19.2 ns) (25 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops; 1 warmup)

It is also possible to store a single run. Example::

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit --raw --json 1+1 > run1.json
    Average: 18.3 ns +- 0.0 ns

    $ python3 -m perf run1.json
    Average: 18.3 ns +- 0.0 ns (3 samples x 10^7 loops)

Combine 3 runs::

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit --raw --json 1+1 > run2.json
    Average: 18.4 ns +- 0.0 ns

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit --raw --json 1+1 > run3.json
    Average: 18.2 ns +- 0.0 ns

    $ python3 -m perf run1.json run2.json run3.json
    Average: 18.3 ns +- 0.1 ns (3 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops)


perf.metadata CLI
-----------------

Display collected metadata::

    python3 -m perf.metadata

Example::

    $ python3 -m perf.metadata
    cpu_count: 4
    cpu_model_name: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-3520M CPU @ 2.90GHz
    date: 2016-06-01T23:43:25
    platform: Linux-4.4.8-300.fc23.x86_64-x86_64-with-fedora-23-Twenty_Three
    python_executable: /usr/bin/python3
    python_version: 3.4.3


timeit versus perf.timeit
=========================

The timeit module of the Python standard library has multiple issues:

* It displays the minimum
* It only runs the benchmark 3 times using a single process
* It disables the garbage collector

perf.timeit is more reliable and gives a result more representative of a real
use case:

* It displays the average and the standard deviation
* It runs the benchmark in multiple processes
* By default, it uses a first sample in each process to "warmup" the benchmark
* It does not disable the garbage collector

If a benchmark is run using a single process, we get the performance for one
specific case, whereas many parameters are random:

* Since Python 3, the hash function is now randomized and so the number of
  hash collision in dictionaries is different in each process
* Linux uses address space layout randomization (ASLR) by default and so
  the performance of memory accesses is different in each process

The article `My journey to stable benchmark, part 3 (average)
<https://haypo.github.io/journey-to-stable-benchmark-average.html>`_ explains
in depth the multiple issues of being focused on the minimum.


Metadata
========

* Python metadata:

  - ``python_implementation``: Python implementation. Examples: ``cpython``,
    ``pypy``, etc.
  - ``python_version``: Python version, ex: ``2.7.11``
  - ``python_executable``: path to the Python binary program
  - ``python_unicode``: Implementation of Unicode, ``UTF-16`` or ``UCS-4``,
    only set on Pyhon 2.7, Python 3.2 and older

* System metadata:

  - ``platform``: short string describing the platform
  - ``cpu_count``: number of CPUs
  - ``cpu_model_name``: CPU model name (currently only supported on Linux)
  - ``aslr``: Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR), ``enabled`` or
    ``disabled`` (currently only supported on Linux)

* Misc metadata:

  - ``date``: date when the benchmark started, formatted as ISO 8601


API
===

Statistics
----------

.. function:: mean(data)

   Return the sample arithmetic mean of *data*, a sequence or iterator of
   real-valued numbers.

   The arithmetic mean is the sum of the data divided by the number of data
   points.  It is commonly called "the average", although it is only one of many
   different mathematical averages.  It is a measure of the central location of
   the data.

   If *data* is empty, an exception will be raised.

   On Python 3.4 and newer, it's :func:`statistics.mean`. On older versions,
   it is implemented with ``float(sum(data)) / len(data)``.

.. function:: stdev(data)

   Return the sample standard deviation (the square root of the sample
   variance).

   ::

      >>> stdev([1.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.75, 3.25, 4.75])
      1.0810874155219827

   On Python 3.4 and newer, it is implemented with :func:`statistics.stdev`.


Clocks
------

.. function:: perf_counter()

   Return the value (in fractional seconds) of a performance counter, i.e. a
   clock with the highest available resolution to measure a short duration.  It
   does include time elapsed during sleep and is system-wide.  The reference
   point of the returned value is undefined, so that only the difference between
   the results of consecutive calls is valid.

   On Python 3.3 and newer, it's :func:`time.perf_counter`. On older versions,
   it's :func:`time.clock` on Windows and :func:`time.time` on other
   platforms. See the PEP 418 for more information on Python clocks.

.. function:: monotonic_clock()

   Return the value (in fractional seconds) of a monotonic clock, i.e. a clock
   that cannot go backwards.  The clock is not affected by system clock updates.
   The reference point of the returned value is undefined, so that only the
   difference between the results of consecutive calls is valid.

   On Python 3.3 and newer, it's :func:`time.monotonic`. On older versions,
   it's :func:`time.time`. See the PEP 418 for more information on Python
   clocks.


RunResult
---------

.. class:: RunResult(samples=None, loops=None, formatter=None)

   Result of a single benchmark run.


   Methods:

   .. method:: format(verbose=False):

      Format samples.

   .. method:: json()

      Encode the result as JSON.

   .. classmethod:: from_json(text)

      Load a result from JSON which was encoded by :meth:`json`.

   .. classmethod:: from_subprocess(args, \**kwargs)

      Run a child process and create a result from its standard output decoded
      from JSON


   Attributes:

   .. attribute:: formatter

      Function to format a list of numbers.

   .. attribute:: loops

      Number of loops (``int`` or ``None``).

   .. attribute:: samples

      List of numbers (``float``). Usually, :attr:`samples` is a list of number
      of seconds.

   .. attribute:: warmups

      Similar to :attr:`samples`: samples run to "warmup" the benchmark. These
      numbers are ignored when computing the average and standard deviation.


Results
-------

.. class:: Results(runs=None, name=None, collect_metadata=False, formatter=None)

   Result of multiple benchmark runs.

   Methods:

   .. method:: format(verbose=False):

      Format runs.

   .. method:: json()

      Encode the result as JSON.

   .. classmethod:: from_json(text)

      Load a result from JSON which was encoded by :meth:`json`.


   Attributes:

   .. attribute:: formatter

      Function to format a list of numbers.

   .. attribute:: name

      Benchmark name (``str`` or ``None``).

   .. attribute:: metadata

      Raw dictionary of metadata (``dict``): key=>value, where keys and values
      are strings.

   .. attribute:: runs

      List of :class:`RunResult` instances.



TextRunner
----------

.. class:: perf.text_runner.TextRunner(nsample=3, nwarmup=1)

   Tool to run a benchmark in text mode.

   Methods:

   .. method:: bench_func(func, \*args)

      Benchmark the function ``func(*args)``.

   .. method:: bench_sample_func(func, \*args)

      Benchmark a function ``func(*args)``, the function must return
      the sample value (ex: elapsed time).

   .. method:: parse_args(args=None)

      Parse command line arguments using :attr:`argparser` and put the result
      into :attr:`args`.

   Attributes:

   .. attribute:: args

      Namespace of arguments, see the :meth:`parse_args` method, ``None``
      before :meth:`parse_args` is called.

   .. attribute:: argparser

      :class:`argparse.ArgumentParser` instance.

   .. attribute:: result

      :class:`RunResult` instance.

   .. attribute:: nsample

      Number of samples (``int``).

   .. attribute:: nwarmup

      Number of warmup samples (``int``).

   .. attribute:: verbose

      Verbose mode (``bool``), default: ``False``.

   .. attribute:: timer

      Timer function used to measure time elapsed by benchmarks, default:
      :func:`perf_counter`.



Metadata functions
------------------

.. function:: metadata.collect_metadata(metadata)

   Collect metadata: date, python, system, etc.

   *metadata* must be a dictionary.


Changelog
=========

* Version 0.2 (2016-06-07)

  - use JSON to exchange results between processes
  - new ``python3 -m perf`` CLI
  - new :class:`TextRunner` class
  - huge enhancement of the timeit module
  - timeit has a better output format in verbose mode and now also supports a
    ``-vv`` (very verbose) mode. Minimum and maximum are not more shown in
    verbose module, only in very verbose mode.
  - metadata: add ``python_implementation`` and ``aslr``

* Version 0.1 (2016-06-02)

  - First public release

Commit message:

Remove TextRunner.timer
* TextRunner.timer is replaced with perf.perf_counter(): don't let
  users pick a wrong timer, always use the best timer
* Add mock dependency to unit tests
* TextRunner.bench_func() now uses functools.partial() to avoid the
  cost of argument unpacking when bench_func() is called without
  argument

doc/index.rst, after:

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
perf: Toolkit to run Python benchmarks
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

* `perf project homepage at GitHub
  <https://github.com/haypo/perf>`_ (code, bugs)
* `perf documentation
  <https://perf.readthedocs.io/>`_ (this documentation)
* `Download latest perf release at the Python Cheeseshop (PyPI)
  <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/perf>`_
* License: MIT


Install perf
============

Command to install perf on Python 3::

    python3 -m pip install perf

Command to install perf on Python 2::

    python2 -m pip install perf

Python 2.7 or Python 3 are supported.


Command line interface
======================

perf.timeit CLI
---------------

Microbenchmark::

    python3 -m perf.timeit
        [-h] [-v]
        [--json] [--raw]
        [--metadata]
        [-p PROCESSES] [-n SAMPLES] [-l LOOPS] [-w WARMUPS]
        [-s SETUP]
        stmt [stmt ...]

Iterations:

* ``PROCESSES``: number of processes used to run the benchmark (default: 25)
* ``SAMPLES``: number of samples per process (default: 3)
* ``WARMUPS``: the number of samples used to warmup to benchmark (default: 1)
* ``LOOPS``: number of loops per sample. By default, the timer is calibrated
  to get samples taking between 100 ms and 1 sec.

Options:

* ``-v`` enables verbose mode
* ``-vv`` enables very verbose mode
* ``--metadata`` displays metadata
* ``--raw`` runs a single process
* ``--json`` writes result as JSON into stdout, and write other messages
  into stderr

Example::

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit 1+1
    .........................
    Average: 18.3 ns +- 0.3 ns (25 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops)

.. warning::
   timeit ``-n`` option becomes ``-l`` in perf.timeit.
   timeit ``-r`` option becomes ``-n`` in perf.timeit.


perf CLI
--------

Display run results or results::

    python3 -m perf
        [-v]
        filename.json [filename2.json ...]

Each file must be a text file which contains one result encoded to JSON per
line. If a filename is "-", read JSON from stdin.

Example::

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit --json 1+1 > run.json
    .........................
    Average: 18.6 ns +- 0.4 ns (25 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops)

    $ python3 -m perf run.json
    Metadata:
    - aslr: enabled
    - cpu_count: 4
    - cpu_model_name: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-2600 CPU @ 3.40GHz
    - date: 2016-06-07T15:07:27
    - platform: Linux-4.4.9-300.fc23.x86_64-x86_64-with-fedora-23-Twenty_Three
    - python_executable: /usr/bin/python3
    - python_implementation: cpython
    - python_version: 3.4.3

    Average: 18.6 ns +- 0.4 ns (25 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops)

Store the result and then display it allows to control how results are
displayed.  For example, timeit doesn't show metadata by default, whereas perf
CLI shows them by default. Use verbose mode to see more details::

    $ python3 -m perf -M -v run.json
    Run 1/25: warmup (1): 19.4 ns; runs (3): 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns
    Run 2/25: warmup (1): 18.2 ns; runs (3): 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns
    Run 3/25: warmup (1): 18.2 ns; runs (3): 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns
    (...)
    Run 25/25: warmup (1): 18.2 ns; runs (3): 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns, 18.2 ns
    Average: 18.6 ns +- 0.4 ns (min: 18.2 ns, max: 19.2 ns) (25 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops; 1 warmup)

It is also possible to store a single run. Example::

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit --raw --json 1+1 > run1.json
    Average: 18.3 ns +- 0.0 ns

    $ python3 -m perf run1.json
    Average: 18.3 ns +- 0.0 ns (3 samples x 10^7 loops)

Combine 3 runs::

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit --raw --json 1+1 > run2.json
    Average: 18.4 ns +- 0.0 ns

    $ python3 -m perf.timeit --raw --json 1+1 > run3.json
    Average: 18.2 ns +- 0.0 ns

    $ python3 -m perf run1.json run2.json run3.json
    Average: 18.3 ns +- 0.1 ns (3 runs x 3 samples x 10^7 loops)


perf.metadata CLI
-----------------

Display collected metadata::

    python3 -m perf.metadata

Example::

    $ python3 -m perf.metadata
    cpu_count: 4
    cpu_model_name: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-3520M CPU @ 2.90GHz
    date: 2016-06-01T23:43:25
    platform: Linux-4.4.8-300.fc23.x86_64-x86_64-with-fedora-23-Twenty_Three
    python_executable: /usr/bin/python3
    python_version: 3.4.3


timeit versus perf.timeit
=========================

The timeit module of the Python standard library has multiple issues:

* It displays the minimum
* It only runs the benchmark 3 times using a single process
* It disables the garbage collector

perf.timeit is more reliable and gives a result more representative of a real
use case:

* It displays the average and the standard deviation
* It runs the benchmark in multiple processes
* By default, it uses a first sample in each process to "warmup" the benchmark
* It does not disable the garbage collector

If a benchmark is run using a single process, we get the performance for one
specific case, whereas many parameters are random:

* Since Python 3, the hash function is now randomized and so the number of
  hash collision in dictionaries is different in each process
* Linux uses address space layout randomization (ASLR) by default and so
  the performance of memory accesses is different in each process

The article `My journey to stable benchmark, part 3 (average)
<https://haypo.github.io/journey-to-stable-benchmark-average.html>`_ explains
in depth the multiple issues of being focused on the minimum.


Metadata
========

* Python metadata:

  - ``python_implementation``: Python implementation. Examples: ``cpython``,
    ``pypy``, etc.
  - ``python_version``: Python version, ex: ``2.7.11``
  - ``python_executable``: path to the Python binary program
  - ``python_unicode``: Implementation of Unicode, ``UTF-16`` or ``UCS-4``,
    only set on Pyhon 2.7, Python 3.2 and older

* System metadata:

  - ``platform``: short string describing the platform
  - ``cpu_count``: number of CPUs
  - ``cpu_model_name``: CPU model name (currently only supported on Linux)
  - ``aslr``: Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR), ``enabled`` or
    ``disabled`` (currently only supported on Linux)

* Misc metadata:

  - ``date``: date when the benchmark started, formatted as ISO 8601


API
===

Statistics
----------

.. function:: mean(data)

   Return the sample arithmetic mean of *data*, a sequence or iterator of
   real-valued numbers.

   The arithmetic mean is the sum of the data divided by the number of data
   points.  It is commonly called "the average", although it is only one of many
   different mathematical averages.  It is a measure of the central location of
   the data.

   If *data* is empty, an exception will be raised.

   On Python 3.4 and newer, it's :func:`statistics.mean`. On older versions,
   it is implemented with ``float(sum(data)) / len(data)``.

.. function:: stdev(data)

   Return the sample standard deviation (the square root of the sample
   variance).

   ::

      >>> stdev([1.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.75, 3.25, 4.75])
      1.0810874155219827

   On Python 3.4 and newer, it is implemented with :func:`statistics.stdev`.


Clocks
------

.. function:: perf_counter()

   Return the value (in fractional seconds) of a performance counter, i.e. a
   clock with the highest available resolution to measure a short duration.  It
   does include time elapsed during sleep and is system-wide.  The reference
   point of the returned value is undefined, so that only the difference between
   the results of consecutive calls is valid.

   On Python 3.3 and newer, it's :func:`time.perf_counter`. On older versions,
   it's :func:`time.clock` on Windows and :func:`time.time` on other
   platforms. See the PEP 418 for more information on Python clocks.

.. function:: monotonic_clock()

   Return the value (in fractional seconds) of a monotonic clock, i.e. a clock
   that cannot go backwards.  The clock is not affected by system clock updates.
   The reference point of the returned value is undefined, so that only the
   difference between the results of consecutive calls is valid.

   On Python 3.3 and newer, it's :func:`time.monotonic`. On older versions,
   it's :func:`time.time` and so is not monotonic. See the PEP 418 for more
   information on Python clocks.


RunResult
---------

.. class:: RunResult(samples=None, loops=None, formatter=None)

   Result of a single benchmark run.


   Methods:

   .. method:: format(verbose=False):

      Format samples.

   .. method:: json()

      Encode the result as JSON.

   .. classmethod:: from_json(text)

      Load a result from JSON which was encoded by :meth:`json`.

   .. classmethod:: from_subprocess(args, \**kwargs)

      Run a child process and create a result from its standard output decoded
      from JSON


   Attributes:

   .. attribute:: formatter

      Function to format a list of numbers.

   .. attribute:: loops

      Number of loops (``int`` or ``None``).

   .. attribute:: samples

      List of numbers (``float``). Usually, :attr:`samples` is a list of number
      of seconds.

   .. attribute:: warmups

      Similar to :attr:`samples`: samples run to "warmup" the benchmark. These
      numbers are ignored when computing the average and standard deviation.


Results
-------

.. class:: Results(runs=None, name=None, collect_metadata=False, formatter=None)

   Result of multiple benchmark runs.

   Methods:

   .. method:: format(verbose=False):

      Format runs.

   .. method:: json()

      Encode the result as JSON.

   .. classmethod:: from_json(text)

      Load a result from JSON which was encoded by :meth:`json`.


   Attributes:

   .. attribute:: formatter

      Function to format a list of numbers.

   .. attribute:: name

      Benchmark name (``str`` or ``None``).

   .. attribute:: metadata

      Raw dictionary of metadata (``dict``): key=>value, where keys and values
      are strings.

   .. attribute:: runs

      List of :class:`RunResult` instances.



TextRunner
----------

.. class:: perf.text_runner.TextRunner(nsample=3, nwarmup=1)

   Tool to run a benchmark in text mode.

   Methods:

   .. method:: bench_func(func, \*args)

      Benchmark the function ``func(*args)``.

   .. method:: bench_sample_func(func, \*args)

      Benchmark a function ``func(*args)``, the function must return
      the sample value (ex: elapsed time).

   .. method:: parse_args(args=None)

      Parse command line arguments using :attr:`argparser` and put the result
      into :attr:`args`.

   Attributes:

   .. attribute:: args

      Namespace of arguments, see the :meth:`parse_args` method, ``None``
      before :meth:`parse_args` is called.

   .. attribute:: argparser

      :class:`argparse.ArgumentParser` instance.

   .. attribute:: result

      :class:`RunResult` instance.



Metadata functions
------------------

.. function:: metadata.collect_metadata(metadata)

   Collect metadata: date, python, system, etc.

   *metadata* must be a dictionary.


Changelog
=========

* Version 0.2 (2016-06-07)

  - use JSON to exchange results between processes
  - new ``python3 -m perf`` CLI
  - new :class:`TextRunner` class
  - huge enhancement of the timeit module
  - timeit has a better output format in verbose mode and now also supports a
    ``-vv`` (very verbose) mode. Minimum and maximum are not more shown in
    verbose module, only in very verbose mode.
  - metadata: add ``python_implementation`` and ``aslr``

* Version 0.1 (2016-06-02)

  - First public release
