doc/runner.rst, before:

.. _runner_cli:

Runner CLI
==========

Command line options of the :class:`Runner` class.

Loop iterations
---------------

Options::

    --rigorous
    --fast
    -p PROCESSES/--processes=PROCESSES
    -n VALUES/--values=VALUES
    -l LOOPS/--loops=LOOPS
    -w WARMUPS/--warmups=WARMUPS
    --min-time=MIN_TIME

Default without JIT (ex: CPython): 20 processes, 3 values per process (total: 60
values), and 1 warmup.

Default with a JIT (ex: PyPy): 6 processes, 10 values per process (total: 60
values), and 10 warmups.

* ``--rigorous``: Spend longer running tests to get more accurate results.
  Multiply the number of ``PROCESSES`` by 2. Default: 40 processes and 3
  values per process (120 values).
* ``--fast``: Get rough answers quickly. Divide the number of ``PROCESSES`` by
  2 and multiply the number of ``VALUES`` by 2/3 (0.6). Default: 10 processes
  and 2 values per process (total: 20 values).
* ``PROCESSES``: number of processes used to run the benchmark
  (default: ``20``, or ``6`` with a JIT)
* ``VALUES``: number of values per process
  (default: ``3``, or ``10`` with a JIT)
* ``WARMUPS``: the number of ignored values used to warmup to benchmark
  (default: ``1``, or ``10`` with a JIT)
* ``LOOPS``: number of loops per value. ``x^y`` syntax is accepted, example:
  ``--loops=2^8`` uses ``256`` iterations. By default, the timer is calibrated
  to get raw values taking at least ``MIN_TIME`` seconds.
* ``MIN_TIME``: Minimum duration of a single raw value in seconds
  (default: ``100 ms``)

The :ref:`Runs, values, warmups, outer and inner loops <loops>` section
explains the purpose of these parameters and how to configure them.


Output options
--------------

Options::

    -d/--dump
    -m/--metadata
    -g/--hist
    -t/--stats
    -v/--verbose
    -q/--quiet

* ``--dump`` displays the benchmark run results,
  see :ref:`pyperf dump <dump_cmd>` command
* ``--metadata`` displays metadata: see :ref:`pyperf show metadata
  <show_cmd_metadata>` command
* ``--hist`` renders an histogram of values, see :ref:`pyperf hist <hist_cmd>`
  command
* ``--stats`` displays statistics (min, max, ...), see :ref:`pyperf stats
  <stats_cmd>` command
* ``--verbose`` enables the verbose mode
* ``--quiet`` enables the quiet mode


JSON output
-----------

Options::

    -o FILENAME/--output=FILENAME
    --append=FILENAME
    --pipe=FD

* ``--output=FILENAME`` writes the benchmark result as JSON into *FILENAME*
* ``--append=FILENAME`` appends the benchmark runs to benchmarks of the JSON
  file *FILENAME*. The file is created if it doesn't exist.
* ``--pipe=FD`` writes benchmarks encoded as JSON into the pipe FD.


Misc
----

Option::

    -h/--help
    --python=PYTHON
    --compare-to REF_PYTHON
    --python-names REF_NAME:CHANGED_NAME
    --affinity=CPU_LIST
    --inherit-environ=VARS
    --copy-env
    --no-locale
    --track-memory
    --tracemalloc

* ``--python=PYTHON``: Python executable. By default, use the running Python
  (``sys.executable``). The Python executable must have the ``pyperf`` module
  installed.
* ``--compare-to=REF_PYTHON``: Run benchmark on the Python executable ``REF_PYTHON``,
  run benchmark on Python executable ``PYTHON``, and then compare
  ``REF_PYTHON`` result to ``PYTHON`` result.
* ``--python-names=REF_NAME:CHANGED_NAME``: Option used with ``--compare-to``
  to name ``PYTHON`` as ``CHANGED_NAME`` and name ``REF_PYTHON`` as
  ``REF_NAME`` in results. For example, ``./python ...
  --compare-to=../ref/python --python-names=ref:patch`` uses "ref" name for
  ``../ref/python`` and use "patch" name for ``./python``.
* ``--affinity=CPU_LIST``: Specify CPU affinity for worker processes. This way,
  benchmarks can be forced to run on a given set of CPUs to minimize run to run
  variation. By default, worker processes are pinned to isolate CPUs if
  isolated CPUs are found. See :ref:`CPU pinning and CPU isolation <pin-cpu>`.
* ``--inherit-environ=VARS``: ``VARS`` is a comma-separated list of environment
  variable names which are inherited by worker child processes. By default,
  only the following variables are inherited: ``PATH``, ``PYTHONPATH``,
  ``HOME``, ``TEMP``, ``COMSPEC``, ``SystemRoot``, ``SystemDrive``, and locale
  environment variables. See the ``--no-locale`` below for locale environment
  variables.
* ``--copy-env``: Inherit all environment variables.
* ``--no-locale``: Don't inherit locale environment variables:

  - ``LANG``
  - ``LC_ADDRESS``
  - ``LC_ALL``
  - ``LC_COLLATE``
  - ``LC_CTYPE``
  - ``LC_IDENTIFICATION``
  - ``LC_MEASUREMENT``
  - ``LC_MESSAGES``
  - ``LC_MONETARY``
  - ``LC_NAME``
  - ``LC_NUMERIC``
  - ``LC_PAPER``
  - ``LC_TELEPHONE``
  - ``LC_TIME``

* ``--tracemalloc``: Use the ``tracemalloc`` module to track Python memory
  allocation and get the peak of memory usage in metadata
  (``tracemalloc_peak``). The module is only available on Python 3.4 and newer.
  See the `tracemalloc module
  <https://docs.python.org/dev/library/tracemalloc.html>`_.
* ``--track-memory``: get the memory peak usage. it is less accurate than
  ``tracemalloc``, but has a lower overhead. On Linux, compute the sum of
  ``Private_Clean`` and ``Private_Dirty`` memory mappings of
  ``/proc/self/smaps``. On Windows, get ``PeakPagefileUsage`` of
  ``GetProcessMemoryInfo()`` (of the current process): the peak value of the
  Commit Charge during the lifetime of this process.


Internal usage only
-------------------

The following options are used internally by pyperf and should not be used
explicitly::

    --worker
    --worker-task=TASK_ID
    --calibrate-loops
    --recalibrate-loops
    --calibrate-warmups
    --recalibrate-warmups
    --debug-single-value

* ``--worker``: a worker process, run the benchmark in the running process
* ``--worker-task``: Identifier of the worker task, only execute the benchmark
  function number ``TASK_ID``.
* ``--calibrate-loops``: calibrate the number of loops
* ``--recalibrate-loops``: recalibrate the number of loops. Option used with
  JIT compilers to validate the number of loops.
* ``--calibrate-warmups``: calibrate the number of warmups
* ``--recalibrate-warmups``: recalibrate the number of warmups
* ``--debug-single-value``: Debug mode, only produce a single value

Commit message:

Implement --timeout when running benchmarks (#205)
If the benchmark execution is exceeding the timeout execution, pyperf
exits with an error 124. This error can be caught by pyperformance or
other tool and report it back to the user.

doc/runner.rst, after:

.. _runner_cli:

Runner CLI
==========

Command line options of the :class:`Runner` class.

Loop iterations
---------------

Options::

    --rigorous
    --fast
    -p PROCESSES/--processes=PROCESSES
    -n VALUES/--values=VALUES
    -l LOOPS/--loops=LOOPS
    -w WARMUPS/--warmups=WARMUPS
    --min-time=MIN_TIME

Default without JIT (ex: CPython): 20 processes, 3 values per process (total: 60
values), and 1 warmup.

Default with a JIT (ex: PyPy): 6 processes, 10 values per process (total: 60
values), and 10 warmups.

* ``--rigorous``: Spend longer running tests to get more accurate results.
  Multiply the number of ``PROCESSES`` by 2. Default: 40 processes and 3
  values per process (120 values).
* ``--fast``: Get rough answers quickly. Divide the number of ``PROCESSES`` by
  2 and multiply the number of ``VALUES`` by 2/3 (0.6). Default: 10 processes
  and 2 values per process (total: 20 values).
* ``PROCESSES``: number of processes used to run the benchmark
  (default: ``20``, or ``6`` with a JIT)
* ``VALUES``: number of values per process
  (default: ``3``, or ``10`` with a JIT)
* ``WARMUPS``: the number of ignored values used to warmup to benchmark
  (default: ``1``, or ``10`` with a JIT)
* ``LOOPS``: number of loops per value. ``x^y`` syntax is accepted, example:
  ``--loops=2^8`` uses ``256`` iterations. By default, the timer is calibrated
  to get raw values taking at least ``MIN_TIME`` seconds.
* ``MIN_TIME``: Minimum duration of a single raw value in seconds
  (default: ``100 ms``)

The :ref:`Runs, values, warmups, outer and inner loops <loops>` section
explains the purpose of these parameters and how to configure them.


Output options
--------------

Options::

    -d/--dump
    -m/--metadata
    -g/--hist
    -t/--stats
    -v/--verbose
    -q/--quiet

* ``--dump`` displays the benchmark run results,
  see :ref:`pyperf dump <dump_cmd>` command
* ``--metadata`` displays metadata: see :ref:`pyperf show metadata
  <show_cmd_metadata>` command
* ``--hist`` renders an histogram of values, see :ref:`pyperf hist <hist_cmd>`
  command
* ``--stats`` displays statistics (min, max, ...), see :ref:`pyperf stats
  <stats_cmd>` command
* ``--verbose`` enables the verbose mode
* ``--quiet`` enables the quiet mode


JSON output
-----------

Options::

    -o FILENAME/--output=FILENAME
    --append=FILENAME
    --pipe=FD

* ``--output=FILENAME`` writes the benchmark result as JSON into *FILENAME*
* ``--append=FILENAME`` appends the benchmark runs to benchmarks of the JSON
  file *FILENAME*. The file is created if it doesn't exist.
* ``--pipe=FD`` writes benchmarks encoded as JSON into the pipe FD.


Misc
----

Option::

    -h/--help
    --python=PYTHON
    --compare-to REF_PYTHON
    --python-names REF_NAME:CHANGED_NAME
    --affinity=CPU_LIST
    --inherit-environ=VARS
    --copy-env
    --no-locale
    --timeout TIMEOUT
    --track-memory
    --tracemalloc

* ``--python=PYTHON``: Python executable. By default, use the running Python
  (``sys.executable``). The Python executable must have the ``pyperf`` module
  installed.
* ``--compare-to=REF_PYTHON``: Run benchmark on the Python executable ``REF_PYTHON``,
  run benchmark on Python executable ``PYTHON``, and then compare
  ``REF_PYTHON`` result to ``PYTHON`` result.
* ``--python-names=REF_NAME:CHANGED_NAME``: Option used with ``--compare-to``
  to name ``PYTHON`` as ``CHANGED_NAME`` and name ``REF_PYTHON`` as
  ``REF_NAME`` in results. For example, ``./python ...
  --compare-to=../ref/python --python-names=ref:patch`` uses "ref" name for
  ``../ref/python`` and use "patch" name for ``./python``.
* ``--affinity=CPU_LIST``: Specify CPU affinity for worker processes. This way,
  benchmarks can be forced to run on a given set of CPUs to minimize run to run
  variation. By default, worker processes are pinned to isolate CPUs if
  isolated CPUs are found. See :ref:`CPU pinning and CPU isolation <pin-cpu>`.
* ``--inherit-environ=VARS``: ``VARS`` is a comma-separated list of environment
  variable names which are inherited by worker child processes. By default,
  only the following variables are inherited: ``PATH``, ``PYTHONPATH``,
  ``HOME``, ``TEMP``, ``COMSPEC``, ``SystemRoot``, ``SystemDrive``, and locale
  environment variables. See the ``--no-locale`` below for locale environment
  variables.
* ``--copy-env``: Inherit all environment variables.
* ``--no-locale``: Don't inherit locale environment variables:

  - ``LANG``
  - ``LC_ADDRESS``
  - ``LC_ALL``
  - ``LC_COLLATE``
  - ``LC_CTYPE``
  - ``LC_IDENTIFICATION``
  - ``LC_MEASUREMENT``
  - ``LC_MESSAGES``
  - ``LC_MONETARY``
  - ``LC_NAME``
  - ``LC_NUMERIC``
  - ``LC_PAPER``
  - ``LC_TELEPHONE``
  - ``LC_TIME``

* ``--timeout``: set a timeout in seconds for an execution of the benchmark.
  If the benchmark execution times out, pyperf exits with error code 124.
  There is no time out by default.
* ``--tracemalloc``: Use the ``tracemalloc`` module to track Python memory
  allocation and get the peak of memory usage in metadata
  (``tracemalloc_peak``). The module is only available on Python 3.4 and newer.
  See the `tracemalloc module
  <https://docs.python.org/dev/library/tracemalloc.html>`_.
* ``--track-memory``: get the memory peak usage. it is less accurate than
  ``tracemalloc``, but has a lower overhead. On Linux, compute the sum of
  ``Private_Clean`` and ``Private_Dirty`` memory mappings of
  ``/proc/self/smaps``. On Windows, get ``PeakPagefileUsage`` of
  ``GetProcessMemoryInfo()`` (of the current process): the peak value of the
  Commit Charge during the lifetime of this process.


Internal usage only
-------------------

The following options are used internally by pyperf and should not be used
explicitly::

    --worker
    --worker-task=TASK_ID
    --calibrate-loops
    --recalibrate-loops
    --calibrate-warmups
    --recalibrate-warmups
    --debug-single-value

* ``--worker``: a worker process, run the benchmark in the running process
* ``--worker-task``: Identifier of the worker task, only execute the benchmark
  function number ``TASK_ID``.
* ``--calibrate-loops``: calibrate the number of loops
* ``--recalibrate-loops``: recalibrate the number of loops. Option used with
  JIT compilers to validate the number of loops.
* ``--calibrate-warmups``: calibrate the number of warmups
* ``--recalibrate-warmups``: recalibrate the number of warmups
* ``--debug-single-value``: Debug mode, only produce a single value
